# An (almost) one-rule syntax for German

To be clear up-front: no, of course it is not possible to write a complete syntax for the German language with just a single rule. However, I will argue that it is (almost) possible to condense the basic recursive syntax of German into such a single rule, which basically amounts to the instruction ~~insert lexeme here~~. Clearly, this one rule alone is not sufficient to capture all the details of actual German sentences. In practice, dozends of additional rules are necessary to completely specify a sentence structure. However, these specifying rules are simple non-recursive instructions like 'make this lexeme plural' or 'put this lexeme in the past tense'. Also, while I think that this condensation into a single recursive rule is theoretically neat, in practice I prefer a slightly more verbose notation using six rules: ~~clause + predication~~, ~~phrase + reference~~, ~~addendum~~ and ~~coordination~~.

about the 'almost': lexemes have to be explicitly told to be either reference or predicate. So actually there are two rules 'insert lexeme as predicate' and 'insert lexeme as reference'. In practice: this is mostly done by marking the lexeme itself as 'verb' (non-capitalized) or 'noun' (capitalized). For some constructions an additional specification 'finite/infinite' is necessary to get the right syntactic structure. So this might be considered as an additional 'syntactic' rule

Crucially, these proposals are not purely theoretical. The necessary rules for the German language are implemented in a surprisingly small amount of just a few hundred lines of code. They can be applied to produce actual sentences of German, simultaneously constructing a detailed underlying syntactic structure. However, there are two important caveats. First, the current implementation captures very many actual German sentence structures, but it is clearly not complete. However, the claim I would like to stake here is that everything missing can be accomplished with a few additional specifying rules. The basic recursive architecture is claimed to be complete. The second caveat is that the current implementation can (still) result in sentences that are ungrammatical. However, there is a transparent framework in place to formulate restrictions on rule application. Many such restrictions are already implemented, but many more are needed to bar the generation of ungrammatical sentences. In most cases, though, the formulation of such restrictions needs much more research than I have been able to perform until now.
